Update starter and create new production guide (#2143)
zenml-io/zenml: docs/book/user-guide/starter-guide/manage-artifacts.md

Assigning custom names to your artifacts can greatly enhance their discoverability and manageability. As best practice, utilize the `Annotated` object within your steps to give precise, human-readable names to outputs:

```python
from typing_extensions import Annotated
import pandas as pd
from sklearn.datasets import load_iris

from zenml import pipeline, step

@step
def training_data_loader() -> Annotated[pd.DataFrame, "iris_dataset"]:
    """Load the iris dataset as pandas dataframe."""
    iris = load_iris(as_frame=True)
    return iris

@pipeline
def feature_engineering_pipeline():
    training_data_loader()

if __name__ == "__main__":
    feature_engineering_pipeline()
```

{% hint style="info" %}
Unspecified artifact outputs default to a naming pattern of `{pipeline_name}::{step_name}::output`. For visual exploration in the ZenML dashboard, it's best practice to give significant outputs clear custom names.
{% endhint %}

Artifacts named `iris_dataset` can then be found swiftly using various ZenML interfaces:

{% tabs %}
{% tab title="OSS (CLI)" %}

To list artifacts: `zenml artifacts list`

{% endtab %}
{% tab title="Cloud (Dashboard)" %}

> The ZenML Cloud dashboard offers advanced visualization features for artifact exploration.

Reviewer: link to cloud?

{% tabs %}
{% tab title="OSS (CLI)" %}

To list versions: `zenml artifacts versions list`

{% endtab %}
{% tab title="Cloud (Dashboard)" %}

The Cloud dashboard visualizes version history for your review.

<figure><img src="../../.gitbook/assets/dcp_artifacts_versions_list.png" alt=""><figcaption><p>ZenML Data Versions List.</p></figcaption></figure>

{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

### Visualizing Artifacts

![Visualizing artifacts](../../.gitbook/assets/intro_dashboard_details.png)

ZenML automatically saves visualizations for many common data types, allowing you to view them in the ZenML dashboard. This provides an intuitive way to explore and understand the artifacts generated by your ML pipelines, making it easier to identify patterns, trends, and potential issues in your data and models.

When you ran your `training_pipeline` above, you will see some visualizations already created for your artifacts. Explore them in the dashboard!

See the [artifact visualization docs](../advanced-guide/data-management/visualize-artifacts.md) for more information on how add your own visualizations for your artifacts!

### Passing artifacts to a downstream pipeline

> You don't always want to start your pipeline with a step that produces an artifact. Often times, you want to consume artifacts in other ways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You don't always want to start your pipeline with a step that produces an artifact. Instead, you often want to consume artifacts in other ways.
```

#### Consuming external artifacts within a pipeline

The `ExternalArtifact` class can be used to initialize an artifact within ZenML with any arbitary data type.

> For example, let's say you have a snowflake query that produces a dataframe, or a CSV file that you need to read. External artifacts can be used for this, to pass values to steps that are neither JSON serializable nor produced by an upstream step:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, let's say you have a Snowflake query that produces a dataframe, or a CSV file, that you need to read. External artifacts can be used for this, to pass values to steps that are neither JSON serializable nor produced by an upstream step:
```

```python
import numpy as np
from zenml import ExternalArtifact, pipeline, step

@step
def print_data(data: np.ndarray):
    print(data)

@pipeline
def printing_pipeline():
    # One can also pass data directly into the ExternalArtifact
    # to create a new artifact on the fly
    data = ExternalArtifact(value=np.array([0]))

    print_data(data=data)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    printing_pipeline()
```

Optionally, you can configure the `ExternalArtifact` to use a custom [materializer](../advanced-guide/data-management/handle-custom-data-types.md) for your data or disable artifact metadata and visualizations. Check out the [SDK docs](https://sdkdocs.zenml.io/latest/core_code_docs/core-artifacts/#zenml.artifacts.external_artifact.ExternalArtifact) for all available options.

#### Consuming artifacts produced by other pipelines

> Often times, there is a need to consume an artifact downstream after producing it in an upstream pipeline or step. Again, using `ExternalArtifact`, you can pass existing artifacts from other pipeline runs into your steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's also common to consume an artifact downstream after producing it in an upstream pipeline or step. Again, using `ExternalArtifact`, you can pass existing artifacts from other pipeline runs into your steps:
```

    dataset_artifact = ExternalArtifact(id=UUID("3a92ae32-a764-4420-98ba-07da8f742b76"))

    # Fetch by name alone - uses latest version of this artifact
    dataset_artifact = ExternalArtifact(name="iris_dataset")

    # Fetch by name and version
    dataset_artifact = ExternalArtifact(name="iris_dataset", version="raw_2023")

    # Pass into any step
    trainer(dataset=dataset_artifact)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    training_pipeline()
```

{% hint style="info" %}
Using an `ExternalArtifact` with input data for your step automatically disables caching for the step.
{% endhint %}

## Managing artifacts **not** produced by ZenML pipelines

Sometimes, artifacts can be produced completely outside of ZenML. A good example of this the predictions produced by a deployed model.

```python
# A model is deployed, running in a FastAPI container
# Let's use the ZenML client to fetch the latest model and make predictions

from zenml.client import Client
from zenml import save_artifact

# In this case, we are fetching the model directly from the latest run
last_run = Client().get_pipeline("training_pipeline").last_run
model = last_run.steps["svc_trainer"].outputs["trained_model"].load()

> # Lets make a prediction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Let's make a prediction
```

    """Load the iris dataset as pandas dataframe."""
    iris = load_iris(as_frame=True)
    return iris

@pipeline
def feature_engineering_pipeline():
    training_data_loader()

if __name__ == "__main__":
    feature_engineering_pipeline()
```

{% hint style="info" %}
Unspecified artifact outputs default to a naming pattern of `{pipeline_name}::{step_name}::output`. For visual exploration in the ZenML dashboard, it's best practice to give significant outputs clear custom names.
{% endhint %}

Artifacts named `iris_dataset` can then be found swiftly using various ZenML interfaces:

{% tabs %}
{% tab title="OSS (CLI)" %}

To list artifacts: `zenml artifacts list`

{% endtab %}
{% tab title="Cloud (Dashboard)" %}

The [ZenML Cloud](https://zenml.io/cloud) dashboard offers advanced visualization features for artifact exploration.

<figure><img src="../../.gitbook/assets/dcp_artifacts_list.png" alt=""><figcaption><p>ZenML Artifact Control Plane.</p></figcaption></figure>

{% hint style="info" %}
To prevent visual clutter, make sure to assign names to your most
important artifacts that you would like to explore visually.
{% endhint %}

{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

> ### Versioning artifacts intentionally

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Versioning artifacts manually
```

### Consuming artifacts produced by other pipelines

It is also common to consume an artifact downstream after producing it in an upstream pipeline or step.  As we have learned in the [previous section](fetching-pipelines.md#fetching-artifacts-directly), the `Client` can be used to fetch artifacts directly. However, in ZenML the best practice is not to use the `Client` for this use-case, but rather use the `ExternalArtifact` to pass existing artifacts from other pipeline runs into your steps. This is a more convenient interface:

```python
from uuid import UUID
import pandas as pd
from zenml import step, pipeline, ExternalArtifact

@step 
def trainer(dataset: pd.DataFrame):
    ...

@pipeline
def training_pipeline():
    # Fetch by ID
    dataset_artifact = ExternalArtifact(id=UUID("3a92ae32-a764-4420-98ba-07da8f742b76"))

>     # Fetch by name alone - uses latest version of this artifact

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # Fetch by name alone - uses the latest version of this artifact
```

    dataset_artifact = ExternalArtifact(name="iris_dataset")

    # Fetch by name and version
    dataset_artifact = ExternalArtifact(name="iris_dataset", version="raw_2023")

    # Pass into any step
    trainer(dataset=dataset_artifact)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    training_pipeline()
```

{% hint style="info" %}
Using an `ExternalArtifact` with input data for your step automatically disables caching for the step.
{% endhint %}

## Managing artifacts **not** produced by ZenML pipelines

> Sometimes, artifacts can be produced completely outside of ZenML. A good example of this the predictions produced by a deployed model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes, artifacts can be produced completely outside of ZenML. A good example of this is the predictions produced by a deployed model.
```

```python
from zenml.client import Client

client = Client()
client.get_artifact("iris_predictions").load()
```
{% endhint %}

Even if an artifact is created externally, it can be treated like any other artifact produced by ZenML steps - with all the functionalities described above!

{% hint style="info" %}
It is also possible to use these functions inside your ZenML steps. However, it is usually cleaner to return the artifacts as outputs of your step to save them, or to use External Artifacts to load them instead.
{% endhint %}

## Assigning tags to your artifacts

If you want to tag the artifact versions of a step or pipeline that is executed
repeatedly, you can use the `tags` property of `ArtifactConfig` to assign an arbitrary number of tags to the created artifacts:

{% tabs %}
{% tab title="Python SDK" %}

```python
from zenml import step, ArtifactConfig

@step
def training_data_loader() -> (
    Annotated[pd.DataFrame, ArtifactConfig(tags=["sklearn", "pre-training"])]
):
    ...
```

{% endtab %}
{% tab title="CLI" %}
You can use the `zenml artifacts` CLI to add tags:

```shell
# Tag the artifact
zenml artifacts update iris_dataset -t sklearn

> # Tag the artiact version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Tag the artifact version
```

zenml artifacts versions update iris_dataset raw_2023 -t sklearn
```

{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

> This will assign tags "sklearn" and "pre-training" to all artifacts created by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will assign tags `sklearn` and `pre-training` to all artifacts created by
```

this step, which can later be used to filter and organize these artifacts.

To learn more about artifacts, please refer to the [Advanced section on artifact management](../advanced-guide/data-management/).
For now, let's keep going on understanding major ZenML concepts!

## Logging metadata for an artifact

One of the most useful ways of interacting with artifacts in ZenML is the ability

> to associate metadata with them. [As mentioned before](fetching-pipelines.md#artifact-information), artifact metadata is an arbitary dictionary of key-value pairs that are useful to understand the nature of the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to associate metadata with them. [As mentioned before](fetching-pipelines.md#artifact-information), artifact metadata is an arbitrary dictionary of key-value pairs that are useful for understanding the nature of the data.
```

As an example, one can associate the results of a model training alongside a model artifact, the shape of a table alongside a `pandas` dataframe, or a size of an image alongside a PNG file.

For some artifacts, ZenML automatically logs metadata. As an example, for `pandas.Series`

> and `pandas.Dataframe` objects, ZenML logs the shape and size of the objects:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and `pandas.DataFrame` objects, ZenML logs the shape and size of the objects:
```

{% tabs %}
{% tab title="Python" %}

```python
from zenml.client import Client

> # Get an artifact version (e.g. pd.Dataframe)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Get an artifact version (e.g. pd.DataFrame)
```

artifact = Client().get_artifact_version('50ce903f-faa6-41f6-a95f-ff8c0ec66010')

# Fetch it's metadata
artifact.run_metadata["storage_size"].value  # Size in bytes
artifact.run_metadata["shape"].value  # Shape e.g. (500,20)
```

{% endtab %}
{% tab title="OSS (Dashboard)" %}

> The information for an artifacts metadata can be found within the DAG visualizer interface on the OSS dashboard:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The information regarding the metadata of an artifact can be found within the DAG visualizer interface on the OSS dashboard:
```

) -> Annotated[
    ClassifierMixin, ArtifactConfig(name="my_model", tags=["SVC", "trained"])
]:
    """Finetunes a given model on a given dataset."""
    model.fit(dataset[0], dataset[1])
    accuracy = model.score(dataset[0], dataset[1])

    
    log_artifact_metadata(
        # Artifact name can be omitted if step returns only one output
        artifact_name="my_model",
        # Passing None or omitting this will use the `latest` version
        version=None,
        # Metadata should be a dictionary of JSON-serializable values
        metadata={"accuracy": float(accuracy)}
        # A dictionary of dictionaries can also be passed to group metadata
        #  in the dashboard
        # metadata = {"metrics": {"accuracy": accuracy}}
    )
    return model
```

For further depth, there is an [advanced metadata logging guide](../advanced-guide/data-management/logging-metadata.md) that goes more into detail about logging metadata in ZenML.

Additionally, there is a lot more to learn about artifacts within ZenML. Please read
the [dedicated data management guide](../advanced-guide/data-management/) for more information.

> ## Code Example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Code example
```

artifacts you want to distinguish at a glance later.

{% hint style="warning" %}

> Since custom versions cannot be duplicated, the above step can only be run once successfully. To avoid altering your code frequently, consider using a [YAML Config](../production-guide/configure-pipeline.md) for artifact versioning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since custom versions cannot be duplicated, the above step can only be run once successfully. To avoid altering your code frequently, consider using a [YAML config](../production-guide/configure-pipeline.md) for artifact versioning.
```

To learn more about artifacts, please refer to the [Advanced section on artifact management](../advanced-guide/data-management/).
For now, let's keep going on understanding major ZenML concepts!

## Logging metadata for an artifact

> One of the most useful way's of interacting with artifacts in ZenML is the ability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the most useful ways of interacting with artifacts in ZenML is the ability
```
